Everybody's really focused on Iran and
oil prices and someone private credit. I
think it's a complete distraction to
what what is going on right now that's
going to fundamentally change society
and markets.
Hi everyone. This is Miriam and I'm
joined today by my colleague Peter
Rudegair
who is our hedge fund reporter here at
the Wall Street Journal.
>> And we have a special guest today. I'm
very excited for this conversation. We
are going to have a conversation with
Carson Block. He is the founder of hedge
fund Muddy Waters Capital and research
outfit Muddy Waters Research.
Uh he is a short seller and short
sellers of course are investors who bet
against a company's stock and they look
for companies that are overvalued facing
disruption or involved in a potential
fraud. Um welcome Carson. Thank you.
Glad good to be here. So the big
question that I have uh for you today is
you know it seems like
the past few years have been a tough
market for short sellers. The market's
been up into the
interest rates have been low
and it's been very hard you know to kind
of maintain probably a negative view on
anything because the market just keeps
going up and up. Some prominent short
sellers like Jim Chanos and Nate
Anderson have thrown in the towel.
Um but that's picture seems to have been
sort of muddied recently by you know the
Fed's recent moves, geopolitical turmoil
and AI's effect on stocks.
Are we now entering a short sellers
market?
I think over the longer term here. Um
I'm very concerned about um AI and what
AI does to jobs in the economy. So
I think over the over several years and
you know the the timeline is is a little
bit squishy on this but I think over
several years we're going to have a
significant
um
a significant financial event uh
dislocation where if you set up set
yourself up right going into it I think
it could be somewhat similar to the GFC
in terms of how short sellers made um
significant returns during that period.
So by GFC you mean the big financial
crisis that happened in 2007-2008.
>> Exactly. I mean it's you know little bit
little consolation because um
you know when we come out on the
backside of that I think it'll be a
it'll be a greatly reordered society
after a lot of turbulence. So
to me the one thing that really matters
that is not getting enough discussion
in terms of the the long-term picture is
AI.
The short-term here
you know I mean the Fed's probably going
to ease but do we have inflation coming
back? How long will the war in Iran
last?
To me those are unknowables. Um you know
and when a lot of it depends on what you
think this administration or this
president is going to do
I think trying to be a Trumpologist is
is a sucker's bet. I mean I just explain
to people look he's a volatility
machine. You have to understand that.
Like so that's the one that's the one
thing I feel good about with financial
markets and this administration is
expect the unexpected. Over the
long-term I think AI is going to
potentially really break the stock
market because the combination of that
and passive investing. How passive
investing is set up all this fragility
in the market. So I'm concerned about
that. Fragility because people aren't
paying attention to individual stocks
anymore. Well the thing is you've had um
so much so passive has kind of become
the market and when you look at how
companies within the major indices so
say the S&P 500 um
when you look at what is driving those
movements
a lot of it is just passive flows and
companies can turbocharge that with
share buybacks. But when you see the
dispersion you know such a small number
of these companies are driving the mean
of the index performance that's great on
the way up but the thing is
if we get to a point where there are a
lot of layoffs cuz a lot of these flows
have come from target date funds
contributions, 401k funds contributions.
So if you get layoffs of knowledge
workers
well they stop contributing to 401ks
there are not going to be you know new
knowledge jobs created for them.
They will take redemptions. You'll get
to a point where there's net selling by
the target date funds and combine that
with people also selling from their
taxable assets because they need to fund
they need to fund their lifestyles
and there's not a lot of active money
anymore there to catch the falling
knife. When this breaks when you get
those flows that to reverse we'll have a
1929 magnitude
correction at 2020 speed. So that is you
know that will be an issue.
Um so you know look if you're short
going into that
obviously you could do okay. Don't get
me wrong. I'm not rooting for that
because I don't want to live in this
post AI world or AI world that I think
we're going to but you know I'm not
driving the bus on this. I'm just a
passenger. So going to do my best to
position the portfolio for you know my
client and myself.
Let me ask another thing that's made the
market for shorting really tough last 5
years is the retail Robinhood trader
right? Meme stocks from you know
GameStop 5 years ago to OpenDoor last
year
you know they've squeezed a lot of
investors. How have you had to adjust
your process you know just to account
for that possibility?
Well it's interesting because when
GameStop happened um
that was really the end of it. Um
although it didn't seem like it at the
time. You know one of uh my colleagues
Andrew Left of Citron Research
he he was the one publicly short
GameStop and you know that huge squeeze
that was organized on Reddit um caused
him a lot of losses and then he said
okay I'm done with short selling and um
turns out that you know that was the
that after that um
these stocks were you know especially
these really speculative companies they
had a horrible year in 2021 after
GameStop. So
um you know we were initially really
cautious. So we didn't actually
um launch a new short activist campaign
until March of 21. So GameStop happened
in January of 21.
And we shorted a company that was a SPAC
called XL Fleet and claimed to do
vehicle electrification. We were really
cautious and the moment we saw some call
buying along with a few people tweeting
like oh let's go squeeze the shorts.
Like we got out of that position
quickly. So you're monitoring Twitter
really carefully. At that point yes. So
as short sellers we you know my firm we
definitely try to avoid situations where
it looks like there's a compressed or
compressing spring. Now maybe we don't
always get it right but um that's you
know I I mean risk management is first
and foremost how this business of short
selling
works if you're going to stay in in the
game.
We're going to take a quick break and
when we come back we'll have more with
Carson Block of Muddy Waters.
>> [music]
>> So there's been a lot of talk and WSJ
reporting about whether we're in an AI
bubble and you referenced this before.
Do you think we are and if so you know
is there an effective way right now to
short AI?
Well yeah. I mean uh I could pound the
table and say that's the wrong question.
You [laughter] know we got to talk about
what is AI going to do to society, the
economy, the markets etc. But um look
the
the first thing is when we think about I
I don't buy the comparisons to the
internet stock bubble of the late 90s
that popped in March of 01 um in the
sense that the companies that are
investing in AI
are these incredibly large very well
capitalized companies and for the most
part um they have even with all the debt
they're taking on these are very
manageable debt loads relative to their
cash flows. So are they potentially
over investing? Will we look back and
say well these were value destructive
investments?
Yeah it's possible but I mean these
company Microsoft is not going out of
business because of this. Google is not
going out of business. Facebook is not
going out of business. Um look the the
most marginal player in that space by a
long shot is CoreWeave but um you know
that that's not a consequential company.
So if you're asking me can these stocks
go down because of these investments?
Yeah they can go down because these
investments. Um
but you know if you also back up and you
go to that scenario where
passive flows reverse and everything
crashes pretty hard. I mean the irony
will be you know under that view of
what's going to unfold that at least for
some period of time
the hyperscalers which you know are
principally driving the index you know
the S&P 500 index and you know to some
extent Nasdaq
that they will be their own stock price
undoing as the AI they're they're
developing or help or helping to develop
displaces workers. So
there'll be some irony in Cuz they're
relying on those flows from target date
funds as you just talked. In that
scenario
um financial markets break. Now
here's the good [clears throat] news.
We developed the technology to bail out
the markets, right? So, I think that
from a financial market perspective, we
end up putting the toothpaste back in
the tube
ultimately, but you know, similar to '08
you know, I think there's there's a lot
of asset value loss that happens first.
But at the end of the day, the people
with assets, those assets will be
re-inflated by government policy because
you know, we're we're on that treadmill.
There's no way to get off it. But you're
mostly thinking of that as tied to
AI-related job losses.
I'm not saying this is likely but within
3 years. And if it's not 3 years, it's 4
years, it's 5 years. I would say that's
likely.
15% of knowledge workers lose their
jobs.
Why? Okay.
First thing is keep in mind that
AI right now, the progression in the
capability of AI models is no longer
linear. Okay, this version of Claude is
a step up.
Why? Because this version of Claude and
ChatGPT were coded by their predecessors
and tested by their predecessors. These
versions are coding and testing their
successors, and that will continue to
happen. So, we are at that inflection
point where the capability goes
exponential.
Even at the present capability of AI the
leading users of AI in the economy are
at the tech companies. And so, what
you've seen is that a number of in with
the best users of AI, they've been able
to replace seven of their colleagues.
So, you've had teams of eight go to one
plus AI.
Now,
what's 15%? 15% is one out of seven.
So, if you think about this from
exponentially increasing capabilities,
is it
unrealistic to assume that the knowledge
economy or the knowledge worker you
know, industries go from seven employees
to six with AI. I don't think that's
unrealistic. So,
we haven't seen human society hasn't
seen that situation before where I mean,
we've certainly eliminated jobs at the
bottom of the economic ladder
but eliminating them at the top in terms
of your highest paid people, people
who've taken out college loans had
promises made to them. So, now this is
where you start thinking about the
political ramifications of this, and
it's going to get
you know, it's going to it's going to
get bad. Like, it's going to get crazy.
So, we're heading toward uh
what I think will be, you know, an
AI-driven kind of, you know, jobs
apocalypse. And then of course, once you
get demand contracting because those
people have lost their jobs, well,
that's going to feed upon itself.
>> What about private credit? That's been a
huge theme um among investors recently.
People are very A lot of people are very
bearish on private credit and the marks
in BDCs and think that it's heading
south in part because of the software
exposure that we talked about. Yeah, I
mean, look, the
okay, the short answer is who knows,
right? Because it's it's an opaque asset
class and by design. But the
you know, there's certain data points
that do make me concerned um about uh
about private credit. There's some
market practices there that are really
loose in terms of documentation where
um documentation is not publicly filed,
it's private between parties, and offers
real opportunity to forge documents so
that you can
pledge the same loans multiple times.
So, that's similar to the First Brand
situation, which is an auto parts
supplier that went bankrupt, and it got
in trouble in part because it pledged
the same collateral for different loans.
Correct.
>> Yeah. Right? Like, this And that's the
sort of thing that it just I just get
the sense talking to credit market
participants that
there's [snorts] complacency there.
Like, that's the sort of thing that it
said in before the global uh global
financial crisis in terms of, you know,
credit and documentation there. So,
>> people are just sort of accepting the
lack of documentation for what it is.
>> Right. Yeah, just like, "Ah, you know,
that's fine." And And look, one of the
things that's been a theme for me uh is
that there've been probably two
generations by my, you know, my way of
counting, two generations of investors
have entered the markets since the GFC.
And so, I don't think they appreciate
risk the way that you know, people who
went through the GFC did or the internet
bubble bursting a few years before that
or Long-Term Capital before that or, you
know, so, I think that there is an
under-appreciation for risk in general
that has led to this complacency. I've
done some work on insurance companies um
recently, nothing that we felt was
actionable, but you know, we have felt
that insurance companies are
you know, a number of insurance
companies are at risk, and one of the
things that they've stuffed their
balance sheets with is private credit.
And
you know, is it really investment grade?
I mean,
you know, like quite possibly not. So,
the the incentives are there. And I
guess one of the other things that, you
know, the
the the bull side or the, you know,
don't worry about it too much side would
say is, "Well, look, default rates,
maybe they'll spike to 6%. You know,
that's what high yield default rates
are." And, you know, when the the credit
cycle turns.
But
you know, default rates aren't there
yet, but the thing is a lot of these
loans are picking.
You know, so Meaning payment in paying
kind. Meaning not paying actual cash.
Right. They're basically IOUs. And so,
you have this a misalignment of
incentives because the managers of these
of the private credit funds, you know,
their incentive is because they're
getting paid on management fees, you
know, percentage of assets under
management. So, if you can keep the NAVs
higher, you get to clip more fees. And
also, you're going to scare away fewer
investors. So, the incentives are all
screwed up. You know, just like we saw
going into global financial crisis, when
you have a misalignment of incentives
you get bad outcomes.
>> But it sounds like it's a little bit
hard to short or find an actionable way
to Yeah, no, I I mean, you can't really
bet against private credit except
there's a spillover to public markets.
>> I wanted to zoom out. You mentioned
volatility that's happening in the
markets, geopolitical with the war in
Iran, commodities. In general, does that
uh make your job easier or harder? Do
you get risk on or risk off in a market
like
one we're having right now?
Well, I mean, the the strategies that we
run, we're going to run no matter what.
So, coming out of the GFC, vol was
artificially suppressed for many years.
And
>> rates were so low.
>> Right, because interest rates were so
low, and the it's clear and even that's
the case still today that the policy
response to any, you know, to any real
drawdown in the market is going to be
swift and overwhelming. Like, we we are
so leveraged as an economy that we just
cannot afford to have financial, you
know, financial dislocations. So, vol
was artificially suppressed, and
that leads to uh that leads to an
under-pricing of risk, and that leads to
misallocation of of assets. And so, when
you see these you know, like valueless
assets like, you know, Bitcoin take off
and hit $100,000 of, you know, fake coin
or whatever it is. Like, that's just a
sign that we have a misallocation of you
know, of capital, and it's it's been
driven, you know, I mean, good part of
it's been driven by the suppression of
volatility. So, volatility in financial
markets is healthy, but you know, maybe
this is kind of an unhealthy form of vol
because it's, you know, vol by tweet or,
you know, I woke up this morning and
decided this was a good idea. And um
you know, I
I don't think that's the kind of vol
that's the good kind of vol for markets.
We're going to take another quick break.
When we come back, we'll have more with
Carson Block of Muddy Waters Research.
So, Carson, when you made your name,
there was a lot of concern around the
Chinese market. Uh I think Sino Forest
was a big short of yours. Is there still
a lot of fraud that you see in the
Chinese market or has it been cleaned
up?
Well, we don't spend a lot of time
looking at
overseas-listed Chinese companies
anymore. And just to to clarify
what we did was we always focused
China-based companies that were listed
in the US or Canada or maybe even Hong
Kong.
And the reason was that especially with
companies listed in the US or Canada
it was for somebody sitting in China to
defraud
overseas investors, it was a heads I
win, tails I don't lose proposition
because the reality is, I mean, there've
been hundreds of confirmed frauds from
China listed in the US. These companies
went dark you know, took investor money.
There's a complete inability of the US
uh for the US to enforce against persons
and entities in China.
Because it's unpoliceable.
>> It's unpoliceable. I lived in China for
a total of 6 years. I've, you know, I
used to be pretty good with the
language. I've, you know, I had my had
my own business in China.
Um even co-authored uh Doing Business in
China for Dummies back in the day. And,
you know, when you think about audits
and the audit playbook. I mean, look,
first of all, what vast majority of
investors don't understand is that
auditors do not prepare financial
statements. Management does. An
auditor's job is to ensure that the
correct financial standards have been
applied, and they've been applied
correctly. So, if you have a situation
that's called a control fraud where
management is cooking the books at the
most senior level
it's not literally it's not the
auditor's job to sit there and identify
forged documents. So,
you just have the situation where it's
consequence-free for people in China to
defraud investors in America. Let's stay
on the topic of financial reporting just
because recently there was an SEC
proposal to eliminate the quarterly
reporting requirement for public
companies so they could do semi-annual
or annual reporting. Does that make your
job harder as a short seller if that
goes into effect?
I think net-net it evens out. We've
publicly, you know, run campaigns
against companies that are semi-annual
reporters from other markets in the
world.
Um, yeah, the crunchy data comes through
less frequently, but on the other hand,
there are these longer voids during
which the company is not speaking. So,
um,
you know, so net-net, it I think that it
evens out for us as activist short
sellers.
Is it good for markets? I mean, I think
objectively you could say no, but, you
know,
I mean, it seems to me like it's a
solution in search of a problem. Mhm.
Um, but, you know, we live, you know, we
live in an era where I think by number,
uh, vast majority of American investors
would support this because, you know, go
back to these comments I made about two
generations
of investors entering the market since
global financial crisis, the only time
risk materialized was that brief moment
during COVID before the government just
came in and and saved everybody and
everything and just sent financial
assets like to the moon. So,
if you don't think risk is real, you you
like this idea that
you know, like companies can, you know,
companies can basically lie for longer
periods of time without those, you know,
uncomfortable numbers getting in the way
of the narrative.
>> So, you do think that this new policy,
if it comes to pass, would allow, uh,
companies to hide fraud for longer? For
us as activist short sellers, like my
firm, maybe only 20, 25% of the things
that we discuss publicly do we think are
actually frauds. I think the far bigger
problem that the world has, uh, markets
and, you know, just institutions and
their credibility in general is the gray
zone. Doing things that are
intellectually fraudulent, but yeah, you
know, you have enough lawyers, you know,
or soon it'll be enough Claude to, you
know,
create the documents and plausible
deniability to get away with it. So,
it's not necessarily illegal. I I
believe that there's an inverse
correlation in society between interest
rates and the level of dishonesty. So,
the lower interest rates go, the more
dishonesty you get. When money is
cheaper, companies can BS investors and
then just buy other borrow cheaply, buy
stuff, and it becomes really difficult
to sort out, like, well, what's, you
know, what's organic growth and what's,
you know, acquired. It papers cheap
money can be used to paper over a lot of
a lot of sins.
>> We've been talking a lot about short
selling, but, uh, back in November you
were at an investment conference where
you pitched a long, uh, Snowline Gold, I
think. Why did you decide to do that?
>> And that's a gold miner, right?
>> Yes.
>> Yeah. Yeah, junior gold miner. Um, so,
we we actually we have a resource, we
have a junior mining funds that we
launched in 2024.
Uh, we brought in somebody who's very
talented, somebody we've known for some
years, um, with with whom we, you know,
we shorted a company publicly in 2017.
So,
um, yeah, he joined and Snowline's been
one of our core holdings. So, I think
it's a really compelling gold miner. I
guess, you know, wanted to do something
a little bit different. I'm fond of
saying from the few times I've done
public longs in my life that when you're
long, the whole world is long back at
you. You know, it's it's like the smiles
on people's faces as they came up to me,
you know, as opposed I get off stage and
I'm tense and
>> [laughter]
>> now I'm thinking like, man, like, you
know, how long till the lawsuit hits,
you know. Now I'm relaxed and I can
enjoy talking. And so, you know, I'd say
it was in part driven also just by my
personal desire to change things up and
be a little bit less tense.
>> Are you finding more reasons to be
optimistic about the market or was that
just a one-off?
>> [snorts]
>> Well, I mean, that was at a time when,
you know, before I I had my concerns
about AI disruption.
You know, in the, you know, between now
and then, I I mean, I don't I you know,
things will go up. I mean, based on
flows. Um,
you know, I can't I I don't have a view
as to what AI disruption does, you know,
initially to metals prices over the long
term. I mean, look, I think the very
long term is QE forever, yield curve
control forever.
Financial assets get inflated. Um,
so,
you know, metals like gold are probably,
you know, great place to be over the
long term. And so, right now it's kind
of funny because
things have sold off. Our AI disruption
basket is generally making money, but
for the wrong reasons. So, everybody's
really focused on Iran and oil prices
and some on private credit. I think it's
a complete distraction to what what is
going on right now that's going to
fundamentally change society and
markets. Wow. Well, that's given us a
lot to think about. Um,
it's been a pleasure to have you on the
show. Thank you so much for joining us.
>> Thanks for having me. Enjoyed it.
>> [music]
[music]
>> So, we basically went to Claude and
we're like, how do we structure this?
>> [laughter]
>> So, Claude's helping you with with your
investments now? It's incredible. So,
yes, we've been able to structure some,
I think, very sophisticated trades.
And, you know, this is not stuff we'd be
able to do, um, pre-AI.
Um, but look, I mean, you know,
big part of my business is litigation
and, you know, I just can't wait to see
it get rid of a lot of lawyers, I guess.
It's going to annihilate that
profession. And I'm a former lawyer,
too, so.
>> [music]